Predicting Poker with Data Science


Over the past decade, chess and checkers have been essentially solved through the use of complex computer engines. In these two games, every potential move by an opponent can be calculated, and the artificial intelligence is able to respond with the best possible move due to all information being available to both players during the game. On the other hand, poker is considered to be a game of “imperfect information,” since everything happening at the table is unknown to the player (Cohen, 2019). This concept makes solving poker significantly more difficult since machine learning algorithms must take into account human behavior, which is inherently irrational and unpredictable. However, recent developments with EEG technology and the poker engine Cepheus have made strides in “solving” poker by countering these problems. 
One of the biggest challenges with solving poker is the concept of bluffing, where a player intentionally misleads their opponents by pretending to have a better poker hand than they truly have, primarily by not practicing rational betting behavior. Machine learning algorithms have to take this into consideration since just because a player is betting a certain way, doesn’t confirm that they have a good or bad hand. Lately, Electroencephalography (EEG) has been utilized as a way to combat bluffing. This method involves reading “electrical signals from the brain” through physical devices placed on the player’s head (Cohen, 2019). The electrical signals are then interpreted and classified by machine learning methods in order to conclude if the player is being honest or bluffing about their hand. EEGs are able to accurately predict a player is bluffing at an average rate of 81.4% (Cohen, 2019). This method gives a critical advantage for players as knowing if their opponent is bluffing or not eliminates the sense of unknown and unpredictability at the table. 
In another attempt to solve poker, a group at the University of Alberta created Cepheus, which is considered to be “the first computer program to play an essentially perfect game of poker” (Travnik, Beck, 2014-2015). Cepheus’ creators claim that while no perfect solution to heads-up limit Texas hold’em poker has been found, Cepheus has played over a “billion, billion hands of poker”, thus getting extremely close to a perfect solution (Travnik, Beck, 2014-2015). This computer program was created without any guidance from humans besides the rules of the game. Over the course of two months, Cepheus was able to build a massive library of previous hands played, thus, the program is able to respond to almost every situation presented by humans. Cepheus is able to accomplish its near-perfect record without deception, nor revealing to its opponents that they are not playing against a human. 
While the unpredictability of how a human will behave in poker will limit data science to be used to 100% predict what will happen, the advancements of EEG and Cepheus have allowed data scientists to make strides in the right direction in order to get close to the 100% mark.


Cohen, O. (2019, June 22). Using Artificial Intelligence Methods To Win In Poker. Retrieved September 10, 2020, from https://towardsdatascience.com/using-artificial-intelligence-methods-to-win-in-poker-5559cc522f3b
Travik, J., & Beck, S. (Eds.). (2014). Cepheus Poker Project. Retrieved September 10, 2020, from http://poker.srv.ualberta.ca/about